Understanding the Relationship between Relative Price and Hospital Status

Dataset:
a.	Dataset from RAND’s National Evaluation of Health Care Prices Paid by Private Health Plans (https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR4394.html)
b.	Describes how much private insurers pay relative to the cost of Medicare (Medicare has a set algorithm for deciding payments, while private insurers negotiate separately with each hospital)
c.	Includes information on hospital location, hospital system, CMS 5-star rating, relative price for outpatient/inpatient services, etc.
d.	Has hospitals from all 50 states

Pitch for Analysis:
a.	In 2020, RAND published their report on the “National Evaluation of Health Care Prices Paid by Private Health Plans”, looking at the discrepancy between what private insurers pay for healthcare plans versus what Medicare pays. The report includes aggregated information on payments for inpatient, outpatient, professional, and facility services costs from 120 self-insured employers in 3112 hospitals all around United States. For each hospital, the hospital system, quality (CMS’s overall hospital star ratings), relative prices of services, simulated Medicare prices (what Medicare would have paid for those same services provided by the private insurers) are given. The researchers used Medicare prices as a baseline for comparison because unlike private insurers, which must negotiate prices with different hospitals and hospital chains, the prices paid by Medicare are not based on negotiation but rather a preset formula considering a hospital’s case-mix, area of service etc. The thought behind this was so that the researchers would be able to see how much leverage a private insurer has in a certain area - in that it is likely that if there are many hospitals in a certain area, the ratio that privates pay to Medicare would be smaller.
b.	The report highlights some findings, particularly in the sheer discrepancy of cost - private insurers spent $33.8 billion on healthcare claims, compared to $14.1 billion simulated cost by Medicare (~240% overall of what Medicare would have spent). The relative price of care has steadily increased in the years 2016 to 2018. However, if you choose to view the relative prices by state, there appears to be a lot of differences between the relative prices with some states going under 200% while others going above and over 325%.
c.	After reading through these findings, I am interested in conducting my own analysis on this dataset. I would like to see whether there is a correlation between the density of hospitals (as measured by number of hospitals in a city, since we’re given addresses of these hospitals, and then perhaps expanding it via mapping the zip codes for each hospital to county level, if city level analysis creates too small subgroups) and the relative inpatient, outpatient, professional, and facility services. Perhaps, we would see that in places where there are many hospitals, there would be less discrepancy among what Medicare pays versus what private insurers pay. I would also like to see if there is a correlation between density of hospitals and star ratings, and I hypothesize that in places where there are more hospitals, the star rating would be higher.
d.	Since we’re given complete addresses of the hospitals, I was also hoping to create a recreate the interactive map made by RAND to visualize the density of hospitals, by mapping the addresses to latitude and longitude.
e.	I would like to explore the relationship between the other variables in the dataset and the relative price variables, and perhaps if there is a strong correlation, create a model to predict relative price.
